THE BITCOIN STOCK-TO FLOW-MODEL

Since the introduction of the Bitcoin whitepaper by Satoshi Nakamoto and mining of the genesis block in 2009, Bitcoin has grown from sub dollar price to its current price of $10,6649 per BTC (on 24/09/2020). Bitcoin as the first digital currency brought with it several innovations which include a unique decentralization protocol ensuring it cannot be controlled by governmental forces, a limited cap on the total number of Bitcoins that can be produced and a high degree of transparency that ensures bitcoins transactions cannot be forged, duplicated or copied. 

One of the main ideas enshrined in the bitcoin white paper was the concept of scarcity; new Bitcoins are created by mining from Bitcoin blocks. Each block contains a piece of information regarding the transactions taking place over a certain period of time. These blocks are solved, and a mining reward is received for solving the said block. The initial mining reward was 50 Bitcoins, but in order to guarantee the value of Bitcoin over time, the Bitcoin reward is halved every four years thereby restricting the rate of release of new Bitcoin into circulation and managing the inflation rate. The price of Bitcoins historically increased significantly with every successive halving, but how do we estimate the future price or value of Bitcoin?
 
According to PlanB in his original article “Modeling bitcoin value with scarcity” explaining the stock-to-flow model, the value of precious metals historically can be ascribed to their scarcity and stock-to-flow ratio which shows the relationship between the rate of production of new metals (for example gold) to the total stock available. He applied this same scarcity ratio to Bitcoins to estimate the stock-to-flow ratio. This number gives the number of years that is needed to produce the current stock of Bitcoins at the current rate. While the value is fairly constant for precious metals, it increases in the case of Bitcoin due to the effect of halving, where Bitcoin production rate is halved every four years leading to a  rising higher stock-to-flow ratio. This higher ratio is indicative of increased value and thus, the price of Bitcoins which is expected to increase. By plotting the stock-to-flow rate against the dollar market capitalization, PlanB was able to apply regression analysis to determine the price at future dates. 

This stock-to-flow model, however, has some significant deficiencies which are further explained. Firstly, The model asserts that the USD market capitalization of monetary goods is derived directly from their rate of new supply without some research or evidence to back it up, It applies statistical results derived from linear regression which are often false given that there is a large degree of freedom for random data to fit a specific outcome. 

Secondly, The Bitcoin Stock-to-flow model assumes that the demand for bitcoin will continue to grow exponentially, which is not the case. It assumed the trends in market demand would carry over, which might not be the case.

Furthermore, the model underestimates the influence of powerful external factors which include the World Government, businesses, central banks, amongst others on the price of bitcoin. The introduction of more stringent regulations, outright banning of exchanges and more could well lead to a decrease in adoption rate for the majority leading to a decrease in prices.  

In conclusion, the stock-to-flow model with scarcity as its main focal point and its underlying assumptions are not fully descriptive of the bitcoin system due to the numerous flaws as discussed. 

